you went away black people lids bow
again and we're here tonight with
somebody known for being on the dance
floor with a tambourine on her hip or
maybe having an Alanis Morissette song
written about her but you probably know
her because she's running for president
we have Marianne Williamson how are you
doing today I'm doing great thank you
thank you for having me on so this would
probably be a good time for you to tell
everybody all the stuff that the media
really doesn't put out about your
background because I'll win when you
look you up basically you're told that
you're a self-help guru and that's all
we get well you know today we're talking
on World AIDS Day and when my career
began in the early 80s I was giving
lectures in Los Angeles and very very
soon after I began lecturing the AIDS
epidemic exploded onto the scene and at
first and for quite a while Western
medicine not that it wasn't trying it
certainly was but they kept playing
cards and coming up empty it was a
definitely and at that time a incurable
situation if people were told that they
had contracted the virus it was an
almost certain death sentence and also
it took a while before they organized
religious institutions have much to say
either working through whatever they had
to work through I at the time was a
young woman talking over at a place
called the philosophical Research
Society in Los Angeles and I was talking
about spiritual matters very
nondenominational but I was talking
specifically about a God who loves us no
matter what and about how when we love
each other miracles happen and so gay
men particularly in Los Angeles everyone
affected by the by the virus but
particularly the the audience of Gael
gay men the population came in in LA
began to come to my lectures and it
became something that we did we were
together all the time because it was
like being in a war zone you know it was
like it was a moment of such
despair and desperation and many of
these people were young this had
followed on the heels of you know a
fabulous time in you know party time
that all of a sudden crashed into a
terrible terrible terrible thing also I
think uh it's it's almost hard for
people to believe this now
We certainly have vestiges of this but
at that time you wouldn't even believe
how many young men who would come to me
they had a double-edged horror on their
hands they had to not only tell their
parents that they were dying but I had
to tell their parents they were gay
which believe it or not was as
horrifying a prospect as having to
reveal the disease so there was so much
suspense so much pain but at the same
time there was so much love with which
we all held onto each other so it was a
major part of the beginnings of my of my
work as a nonprofit activist also
because in addition to giving the
lectures and and what would then become
my writing career I founded an
organization called the LA Center for
living and we also had a one in New York
called a New York Center for living and
what these were about were about giving
non-medical support services to people
living with HIV so let's say you have
been diagnosed with his illness what are
you supposed to do all day
people were alone so we rented a house
where people could just come they could
get Reiki they could get massage and let
me tell you something at that moment
when there was so much misinformation
about AIDS and so much fear about AIDS
the very fact they could get a massage
for someone and these were all free
services and we would see people and
would sit around and we would watch
movies together and have support groups
together it was really quite a
phenomenon and then we started one in
New York as well and then one day I came
to the house and I said where's John or
whatever and they said well John's not
here today and I said well why isn't
John here today well John's not here
today because he couldn't get out of bed
so he couldn't come over and I would say
well how's he gonna eat as well we don't
know
because we people were making food at
the house every day so I would say well
let me better take a meal over to John
and then that turned into a project
called Project Angel Food where we
delivered meals to homebound people with
AIDS and other life challenging
illnesses and as of today project
Angelou has served over 12 million meals
that's it
definitely kind of leads into the whole
idea behind your campaign there
definitely seems to be a hill the
country aspect to it and I'm just kind
of wondering if they play into each
other
well they've more than planned to each
other they are each other because what I
learned during the AIDS crisis was that
I learned not only how sad life can be
but I also learned how good people are I
saw it in Los Angeles I saw it in New
York and I saw it in all of the places
whether they were doing this kind of
work people really showed up I mean one
of the great sort of untold stories in a
way about that that period of time is
not just all the people who reject ik
eight people and rejected AIDS patients
but also how many people accept it and
and accept in AIDS patients and and so
much of the stuff that has occurred that
grew out of that Human Rights Campaign
and gay you know marriage equality and
all of those things were really seeded
by the way people showed up at that time
particularly one of the things that was
happening in in Los Angeles was that you
know Los Angeles is so defined by the
entertainment industry and the
entertainment industry is so full of
obviously very vibrant obviously very
talented gay people so Hollywood really
showed up so I saw there and then
continued with the rest of my nonprofit
work we are good people Americans are
good people I'm not saying we're better
than other people we're not better than
other people but we are a good and
decent people but you and as you well
know because you know I know you're
working you and I are certainly aligned
on this you wouldn't know how good and
decently are when you look sometimes at
Americans for American public policy
until the we have is the divergence
between the good
the decency and the dignity of the
average American and who is who is
following the dictates of their
conscience on a daily basis versus the
activity of a government that has been
so hijacked and corrupted by you know
the economic you know market forces that
are soulless and untethered to any
ethical and moral consideration that
that public policy then displays no
conscience whatsoever no compassion
whatsoever
and the way I have seen it and the way
I've seen it play out over the decades
is that so many of the people whose
hearts are filled with love have just
been so turned off to politics for that
reason so then some of the most
conscience based people most Integris
people have been chronically disengaged
from politics which only make politics
get more toxic which only make the best
people disengage which only made it more
toxic which brought us to here and I
think that there's been a mass awakening
that's why the popularity of such people
as yourselves but now we have to harness
the goodness and the decency for
political purposes because what we did
in the nonprofit sector can be done in
the public sector it's the same thing I
think that public policy should act
according to the dictates of basic
decency and and conscience in living
with other you know human and other
sentient beings just like individual
behavior should and I think that people
listen and hear us on the level that we
speak from so nobody can say well we've
tried that and it didn't work because in
fact we haven't tried it not in this
country
we've never taught to harness real
compassion for political purposes
yeah when one of the things you said in
one of the debates was you mentioned
something along the lines of you know
trumped it and win on ideas he he won by
saying make America great and when I was
looking at the reactions of people it
almost it seemed like they thought you
were just saying Oh Republicans are dumb
but to me that read that he got people
about an idea a slogan even if it didn't
really mean anything do you think that
your work can help achieve kind of a
counterbalance to that I wasn't saying
nor do I believe that Republicans young
I think that there are high-minded
conservative values and I think that
there are high-minded liberal values
Eisenhower President Eisenhower who was
a Republican president said that
American mind at its best is both
liberal and conservative it doesn't
matter what side of the political
spectrum you're on neither side and not
know no group no socio-economic with no
ethnic with no political group has a
monopoly on human values and so I
believe that the counter force to
mean-spiritedness wherever it comes from
the left or the right the counterbalance
is a conversation it gets to the heart
of the matter where we just we want to
be good people and we want to treat
people right and we want a government
you know if you have a representative
government a government that is
supposedly there to quote-unquote
represent the will of the people
representing the will of the people
should mean representing the
consciousness of the people so if we are
good and decent people whether we're on
the left or the right which I believe
that we are the majority of Americans
good and decent people and if our
government were to reflect that through
it through public policy then absolutely
that would be a counter force to the
craziness and falsity and the
mean-spiritedness of this moment and
this brings us to the Department of
Peace right yes we have we now spend
seven hundred and sixty billion dollars
on our military budget now my father
fought in World War two I'm a fan of the
US military obviously we need a strong
military I don't think anybody doubts
that you know before World War two we
didn't even have a standing army
obviously we do now we need that that
that goes without saying to me however I
think what too many Americans probably
don't realize
is how much our military budget reflects
hundreds of billions of dollars over and
above what the military says that they
need so to me it's like with your
physical body I see them I see the
military like a good surgeon does
America need a really fine surgeon on
hand all the time
yeah we do I mean oh we do what a sane
person tries to avoid surgery if
possible so you don't just take medicine
you also have to cultivate your health
you have to take care of your diet take
care of exercise etc if you don't take
care of your body then health and then
sickness is almost inevitable well we
have to see at the same time you can't
just cultivate preparedness for war and
preparedness for warmer it must be
cultivated but we must also prepare for
peace you know Donald Rumsfeld was the
Secretary of Defense under George Bush
he said we must wage peace James
Madison's the Secretary of Defense under
Trump until he left the Defense
Department he said if you don't fully
fund the State Department I will have to
buy more ammunition so we have to
cultivate peace not just prepare for war
and that's why so what we have reflected
in our budget is we have 760 billion
that goes to the military budget but
then the State Department is 40 billion
and then within that we have the USAID
which is a long-term development and
humanitarian assistance and then in
addition to that 17 also within the 40
billion is less than 1 billion that we
spend on what are called the
peacebuilding agencies I think a lot of
people don't even understand the
peacebuilding agencies exist there are
actually factors having to do with
educating children economic
opportunities for women reduction of
violence against women the basic
reduction of human unnecessary human
suffering when those factors are
addressed
statistically we have a higher incidence
of peace and we have a lower incidence
of conflict America but America needs to
decide do we want a violent society do
we want a non-violent society
that's really what we need to get to and
that's why I Department of Peace
coordinates and addresses you know
things like restorative justice and
conflict resolution and and violence
prevention in the schools and
trauma-informed education there are
things that we can do on a on a domestic
basis as well as on an international
basis to Enki increase the probability
of peace we should have a peace Academy
just like we have a Military Academy and
the people in our government who are
referred to as the peace builders in my
administration they would have an equal
seat of power at the National Security
Council table well it makes sense I mean
there's there are a lot of studies from
the military side of things showing that
the Civil Affairs guys and the guys that
go out and build bridges and build
schools and stuff like that they keep
more fight off the battlefield than
anybody that is so true and all of this
that I said you're pointing out
something really important here because
nothing I said was a critique of the
military these are political decisions
the corruption here is not military
corruption it is political corruption it
has to do with expenditures and
activities that are not for military
purposes they are for the purpose of
increasing short-term profits for
defense contractors and what what
happens and I've you know heard this
from military people all the time we we
burden our military with problems that
shouldn't even they shouldn't even be
put into the hands of the military they
should have been nipped in the bud years
and years before they shouldn't even
been created we create I mean look at
Isis it was our invasion of Iraq that
did that so then the military ins I'm
having to clean up a mess that the
politicians created yeah so another one
of your new ideas the Department of
Children and Youth what what is that we
have millions of American children who
live with vulnerabilities and challenges
that are it's like a huge invisible sea
of you unnecessary human suffering we
have 13 million hungry
in the United States and we have a
hundred thousand homeless children in
the United States we have children it's
hard to even fathom we have millions of
children in the United States who go to
school at elementary school and ask the
teacher if they have some food for them
we have millions of American children we
have I don't know on this one I don't
think we have millions but we definitely
have elementary school children on
suicide watch in this country and we do
have millions of children who go to
classrooms where there are not even the
adequate school supplies with which to
teach a child to read and if a child
cannot learn to read by the age of eight
then the chances of high school
graduation are drastically reduced and
the chances of incarceration are
drastically increased so the question
can't just be how to create jobs it also
has to be how to create an education and
how to fully actualize the intellectual
and and and cultural capacity of every
child
I want a massively alignment of
investment in the United States in the
direction of our children and so and and
because so much happens before the age
of ten so I want every school in the
United States and be a palace of
learning and culture in the arts because
if you child if you set a child up to
succeed before the age of ten so much is
handled so much is handled so we need
trauma-informed education we need
community wraparound services we need
mental health counselors right now we
have one mental health counselor for
every 1,500 children in the United
States and the public schools we're not
even having I don't know if you have
children but I don't know if we're not
even having a national conversation
about what is PTSD that because we the
psychologist now say that millions of
American children in our schools are
suffering a form of PTSD that is no less
severe than the PTSD of our returning
veterans from Afghanistan and Iraq now
think about this think about your
workplace and and everybody should think
about you know let's say the work but
wherever you work okay so imagine if
where you go every day there was now an
established pattern around the country
people coming in and doing a mass
shooting imagine if you work in a
department store but let's say that
there was a pattern now people coming up
and shooting up people at a department
store this would give you a level of
chronic PTSD lease and these kids are
now in our schools on these lock downs
so I think that we need to recognize the
emotional and psychological problems of
so many children and we can help these
children and so there are many things
that we can do to address the violence
prevention and issues such as that in
our schools among our children we could
have mindfulness in the schools there
are the the these are vulnerabilities
and challenges that go beyond the
capacity of the Department of Education
and Health and Human Services to deal
with that's true of both both the
Department of Peace and Department of
Children and Youth a lot of it is
coordinating it's not creating new
things it's just like we did with the
Home Department of Homeland Security we
recognized after 9/11 that we had there
was all this tragic and you know I
realized now when I'm talking there
people do not remember because they're
they're too young to actually remember
that day necessarily but one of the
really tragic things that happen at 9/11
was I think it was Mohamed Atta's
computer and because the FBI wasn't in
communication with the CIA just it was
just a simple lack of communication that
could have made all the difference
so Homeland Security was created to just
coordinate and that's what we need to do
in terms of creating a more peaceful
society and that's what we need to do in
terms of helping these children
coordinate some of these efforts that
are already happening but they're not
connected to each other and some of the
problem solving is not we fund the
problem creators we do not fund the
problem solvers we fund the problem
creators because they represent
corporate interests all that stuff that
you talk about so eloquently all the
time
yeah so one of the one of the more
controversial series of videos that I
did was actually on reparations and I
based it on a number and it was the
highest number I could find thrown out
by any politician and it's one fifth of
the number that you're proposing so I'm
curious how you see reparations working
and basically what what's the end goal
for reparations it doesn't look like
it's just a payout I don't think the
average American is a racist that's not
my experience or my belief but I do
think that the average American is
woefully under educated about the
history of race so I think my experience
in talking in the whitest states in
America is that when people hear the
history you know a lot of it we learned
what we learned in the seventh grade
we don't really remember oh we weren't
taught that much of it and like we were
talking in at the beginning you and I
we're decent people so let's look at
this the first slave ship was brought
over in 1619 and slavery did not end in
this country - 1865 that's just shy of
two hundred and fifty years so at that
time General Tecumseh Sherman promised
forty acres and a mule to every former
slave family of four and historians
believe that there were at that time
between four and five million people who
were emancipated so the the the promise
of the 40 acres and a mule was in was
rescinded and what what followed except
for twelve years of Reconstruction the
the north sent down the US government
sent down federal troops to the south to
ensure that slavery would not be
reinstituted but they left after twelve
years so except for those twelve years
you had following two hundred and fifty
years of slavery and
hundred years of institutionalized
violence towards black people because
the southern legislatures passed what
were called the black code laws to
ensure that there would be subpar
economic and social and political
opportunities for black people so that
was not a dress you have slavery over in
1865 and it wasn't until 1965 100 years
it's staggering 100 years before the
civil rights movement the the Civil
Rights Act in 1964 dismantled
segregation and in 1965 the Voting
Rights Act gave equal access to the
ballot but a lot of that's been chipped
away up because of the chipping away the
Voting Rights Act in 2013 the point is
that the economic gap right it existed
when slavery ended that has never been
closed now Germany has paid 89 billion
dollars in reparations to Jewish
organizations since World War two and
one of the things that's interesting
about that to me is that even though
obviously it doesn't mean the Holocaust
didn't happen it has gone far towards
establishing reconciliation between
Germany and the Jews of Europe many
people now acknowledge this issue of the
of the black of the gap now there was a
study recently you know if you have a
black person in America who has equal
educational and professional achievement
to a white person they still
statistically make less money and what
has been established is that if black
families made as much wealth as white
families our economy would be 1.5
trillion dollars larger so it would help
everybody now if you actually take the
four to five million slave slaves and
then family of four and multiply that
forty acres and a mule we'd be talking
about trillions of dollars well that's
not going to happen but I believe
anything less than hundred billion is an
insult it's like when you're selling a
house and somebody comes in some low you
don't even call them back delay I think
I believe 500 billion is is politically
feasible because I think we're good
people and I think that we need
politicians who say to people instead of
just what this does for you and what
this does for you
we need a politics and that's what I
believe my campaign is that says to
people let's do the right thing and the
whole country will be better off so my
idea my plan is for a council a
reparations council and this would be
let's say anywhere between 35 and 70
people who are black leaders from
culture business academia etc and it is
their job to disperse the 500 billion
dollars over a period of 20 years and
the stipulation on the part of the US
government is that the money is only to
be used for purposes of economic and
educational renewal so if the
reparations council uses the money
towards historically black colleges if
they use a provincial capital adi
gentrification efforts that's their
business if I owe you money I don't get
to tell you how to spend it as long as
this within that stipulation of economic
and education or we knew all and the
difference between race-based
policies and and reparations is that
race-based policies address the economic
issue but they don't address the moral
issue they don't they don't provide for
the kind of psychological and emotional
healing that this country needs in
regards to race we just take this toxic
baton of racial turbulence and we just
pass it generation to generation
what reparations do is they carry an
inherent mayor culpa an inherent
acknowledgment of the historical wrong
that was done the willingness of on the
part of a generation to recognize it as
a debt and a willingness to pay it I
just said to me this it's such a win-win
it's such a win-win on every level
including economic by the way you
compare you know we you look at the 2017
tax cut
right two trillion dollars where eighty
three cents of every dollar went to the
very richest corporations and
individuals and we don't even have
nobody is given any evidence that that
will ever even pay for itself much less
stimulate the economy whereas something
like this absolutely does so that's the
plan now how do you think you're gonna
be able to get any boom in reparations
comes up now I know you you said in the
past that you don't believe that the
average American is this racist and I
don't know maybe it's cuz I'm dad for
the south I have a different style
I said you know maybe it's that I'm down
here in the south
I tend to have a different view of that
most times we might erase a lot down
here I'm curious
that number and you're you're right
about billion dollars that's what I use
to do all the math on and when you break
it down it's an insult five hundred
billion definitely seems more in the
ballpark but even at a hundred billion
I was watching people just freaked out
over the money and I'm just I'm
wondering how you're gonna convince the
average white guy in the South that this
is something we need to do I know about
your work I don't when I want you I
don't feel like you figured out what you
should say people want to hear that's
the corruption of our politics
politicians figuring out what you want
to hear figuring out what they could get
away with that's not leadership if we're
not gonna have a big enough number then
we should then we shouldn't do it
because
you have to have a younger generation if
we pay out a hundred billion dollars
which is a lot of money but then you
have a younger generation of black
people that still says oh yeah you
didn't really do much what where did
that get us if it's not a big enough
number then it it doesn't carry the
force either economically or in any or
morally or or spiritually emotionally or
psychologically it has to be big enough
that it's that it's the level of of
statement and the level of repair now
you talk about the South I come from
Houston Texas not only do I come from
Houston I was born and raised there I
mean I know I know that racial out of
Texas but I have also seen how the world
has changed
I I remember as a little girl when I
used to go to there was a building and
still there in Houston called the
medical towers and we go to the doctor
and I remember seeing a sign between the
elevators colored restrooms downstairs
and I remember asking my mother why that
was and my mother explaining things to
me and I remember when after the Civil
Rights Act though that was gone that was
part of what was was outlawed that kind
of thing is that segregation I remember
hearing a man call an adult black man I
heard a white a white man calling a an
adult black man who was working in a
restaurant say come here boy
and asking my father what that was about
and my father explaining to me but my
parents explained this to me in terms of
how wrong it was and the and the good
thing is this country has made strides
you know I there are a lot more lovers
than haters in this country it's just
that the haters are are active
politically and they had mega phones in
there on social media so you're right
there are people out there were racist
and they're people out there who don't
relate to what I'm talking about
but there are also millions of millions
of people out there when
roses and you do know what I'm talking
about and the way I'm my whole campaign
is about saying what I think leaders
should you is to say what the leader
thinks needs to be said and then not
because once you start just saying what
you think you need to say in order to
get elected then that's good as to where
we are so I'm saying what I believe
needs to be said and people hey they're
gonna vote for it or not and also let's
remember the president doesn't have a
magic wand so when I say reparations you
know plan 500 million that doesn't mean
I would have a magic wand I'll make it
happen the next day
it's what I'm proposing is what I
believe is a good idea and it begins a
national conversation and we take it
somewhere all right okay so something I
ask everybody that comes on this show is
what is one thing the average person can
do to make the world better to provide a
solution just one individual action that
person on their own continue purify your
own hearts there's so much meanness
today there's so much meanness on the
left and on the right there's so much
something really terrible has happened
you know it's like when we don't agree
with someone these days it's like not
only do we not agree but they should
shut up that's like an emotional fascism
that's in the air and I think we all
need to be more forgiving and we all
need to be more respectful of people who
don't share our opinion you know there's
a smug smug self-righteous intolerance
on the left is no less dangerous to the
emotional fabric of this country than a
smug self-righteous intolerant person on
the right you know I'm sure that there
are people who have heard the
conversation you have I've had today who
might not agree with my conclusions but
still a conversation can add to your
understanding it can add to your insight
it can add to your thinking whether or
not you agree I mean there are many
things that high-minded a high-minded
conservative might talk about and in the
end I don't I don't
agree with the ultimate conclusion but
I'm like yeah I'm my thinking is broader
because I heard it talked about that way
nobody nobody has a monopoly on values
and nobody owns this country we all do
and meanwhile there's this left versus
right thing that we're all cut up or
caught up in and the real enemy of
democracy which is this corporatism and
this corporate aristocracy which has
market forces unfettered to any ethical
or moral consideration for people our
planet is just corrupting our government
undermining our values in eating this
country alive while we're over here
having these ultimately unimportant
fights not recognizing where the real
assault on our democracy is coming from
because it's not from high-minded
conservatism or high-minded liberalism
it's coming from something that's really
dark so that's how I see those things
you know we have a politics of people
pleaser we have politicians you know
they do focus groups and this is what we
should say to get elected what is going
on here that's just the degradation once
again you know that's why I like shows
like yours you're just a truth teller
you're just letting it fall where falls
somebody agrees with you they don't
agree with you that's what I think
politics should be okay so we're closing
in on the end of the show here partly
shot and this is the part where you can
get any point I like I know you're in
Iowa now good and push there anything
you want to plug anything you need to
anything along you know we have a
corporate aristocracy and it's made up
health insurance companies and big
pharmaceutical companies and gun
manufacturers and food companies and
chemical companies and agribusiness and
defense contractors and oil and gas and
the way our country works and all of
them have a legitimate role to play in
our in our country I mean it's not like
they don't have legitimate roles to play
in our country but what we have done
since the 1980s is given there
short-term profits undue influence and
our government does more to advocate for
their short-term profits for their
stockholders than it does to advocate
for our people our health and our safety
in our planet now in Iowa one of the
places where this is the most dangerous
and destructive has to do with the role
of agribusiness and the way it has
devastated the farming sector and we
have in Iowa you have farmers who are
committing suicide
you have explosion of bankruptcies among
farmers you have terrible devastation of
the soil lack of crop diversification
all of this started back in the 80s
because before then and the 70s but
before then if a farmer didn't have a
good you know yield one year it went to
the bank the bank was liable to be a
local bank that would most probably say
well we understand you had a bad year
don't worry about it we'll extend the
loan you'll pay us next year
but what happened starting in the 80s is
the banking became so much a handmaiden
to corporate agribusiness so you have
all these people never even visited this
land they know nothing about farming
they know nothing about land and all
about is about creating short-term
profits and this is devastated the
farming sector but the thing is and once
again you talk about this all the time
it's one underlying problem and that is
the corporate takeover of the US
government it's an it it looks like it's
different problems you know it looks
like it's the opioid crisis over there
because of predatory practices on the
part of big pharma it's the Boeing
disaster over there because of the FAA
looking away while Boeing you know cut
corners over there it's devastation
among farmers over here because of
agribusiness and what it's done to
farmers but it's really it looks like
different problems there's really only
one problem and that is what has
happened when your government has so
sold out that whether if the FAA not
looking at Boeing or the FDA not
watching out what was going on with big
pharma and the opioid crisis or whether
it's the USDA and the FDA being in in
the pockets of agribusiness rather
than the government doing what he used
to do which is really supporting the
farmer this is what we need to recognize
that we need a non-violent political
revolution in this country because the
corporate aristocracy represents it's
it's an economic tyranny and it is
hurting people and it is undermining our
democracy our government is supposed to
represent the will of the people not
just represent the short-term profit
motivation of huge corporate
conglomerates which have no sense of
ethical or moral responsibility to
people and our entire political
establishment is in on it our entire
political establishment is so corrupted
because of the money that it's time for
the people to step in and that's why you
do and that's what I do and there are a
lot of us there are a lot of in there
and I think ultimately it's going to
lead to a good thing I think so too
all right so that's gonna wrap up the
show the interview portion of the
podcast if you're watching on YouTube
this will be the end of it and I really
want to thank you for coming on thank
you I learned from you and I think
you're great and you're you're doing
something really important as you know
thank you so much thank you have a good
night